README.md, before:

cmdarg
======

[![Build Status](http://jenkins.aklabs.net/buildStatus/icon?job=cmdarg-test)](http://jenkins.aklabs.net/job/cmdarg-test/)

Requires bash >= 4.

    source cmdarg.sh

Enjoy

Installation
============

From source

    cd cmdarg
    make install

From RPM

    # add http://yum.aklabs.net/el/[5|6]/noarch as a yum repo for your system
    yum install cmdarg

Usage
=====

cmdarg is a helper library I wrote for bash scripts because, at current, option parsing in bash (-foo bar, etc) is really hard, lots harder than it should be, given bash's target audience. So here's my solution. There are 4 functions you will care about:

    cmdarg
    cmdarg_info
    cmdarg_parse
    cmdarg_usage

TL;DR
=====

Cmdarg lets you specify arguments (things you require), options (things you don't require), and lets you easily parse them. The arguments can be set on the command line either via '-X' or '--Y', where X is the short option and Y is the long option.

    cmdarg 'r:' 'required-thing' 'Some thing I require'
    cmdarg 'o?' 'optional-thing' 'Some optional thing'
    cmdarg 'b' 'boolean-thing' 'Some boolean thing'
    cmdarg_parse "$@"

    echo ${cmdarg_cfg['required-thing']}
    echo ${cmdarg_cfg['optional-thing']}
    echo ${cmdarg_cfg['boolean-thing']}

    # your_script.sh -r some_thingy -b -o optional_thing
    # your_script.sh --required-thing some_thingy --boolean-thing

Because cmdarg does key off of the short options, you are limited to as many options as you have unique single characters in your character set (likely 61 - 26 lower & upper alpha, +9 numerics).

cmdarg
======

This function is used to tell the library what command line arguments you accept.

    cmdarg FLAGS LONGOPT DESCRIPTION DEFAULT VALIDATOR

Examples:

    cmdarg 'f' 'boolean-flag' 'Some boolean flag'
    cmdarg 'a:' 'required-arg' 'Some required arg'
    cmdarg 'a?' 'optional-arg' 'Some optional arg with a default' 'default_value'
    cmdarg 'a:' 'required-validated-arg' 'Some required argument with a validator' '' validator_function

*FLAGS* : The first argument to cmdarg must be an argument specification. Argument specifications take the form 'NOT', where:

- N : The single letter Name of the argument
- O : Whether the option is optional or not. Use ':' here for a required argument, '?' for an optional argument. If you provide a default value for a required argument (:), then it becomes optional.
- T : The type. Leave empty for a string argument, use '[]' for an array argument, use '{}' for a hash argument.

If O and T are both unset, and only the single letter N is provided, then the argument is a boolean argument which will default to false.

*LONGOPT* is a long option name (such as long-option-name) that can be used to set your argument via --LONGOPT instead of via -N (from your FLAGS).

*DESCRIPTION* is a string that describes what this argument is for.

*DEFAULT* is any default value that you want to be set for this option if the user does not specify one

*VALIDATOR* The name of a bash function which will validate this argument (see VALIDATORS below).


Validators
==========

Validators must be bash function names - not bash statements - and they must accept one argument, being the value to validate. Validators are not told the name of the option, only the value. Validator functions must return 0 if they value they are given is valid, and 1 if it is invalid. Validators should refrain from producing output on stdout or stderr.

For example, this is a valid validator:

    function validate_int
    {
        echo "$1" | grep -E '^[0-9]+$'
    }

    cmdarg 'x' 'x-option' 'some opt' '' validate_int

... While this is not:

    cmdarg 'x' 'x-option' 'some opt' '' "grep -E '^[0-9]+$'"

cmdarg_info
===========

This function sets up information about your program for use when printing the help/usage message. Again, see cmdarg.sh for the latest syntax.

    cmdarg_info "header" "Some script that needed argument parsing"
    cmdarg_info "author" "Some Poor Bastard <somepoorbastard@hell.com>"
    cmdarg_info "copyright" "(C) 2013"

cmdarg_parse
============

This command does what you expect, parsing your command line arguments. However you must pass your command line arguments to it. Generally this means:

    cmdarg_parse "$@"

... Beware that "$@" will change depending on your context. So if you have a main() function called in your script, you need to make sure that you pass "$@" from the toplevel script in to it, otherwise the options will be blank when you pass them to cmdarg_parse.

Any argument parsed that has a validator assigned, and whose validator returns nonzero, is considered a failure. Any REQUIRED argument that is not specified is considered a failure. However, it is worth noting that if a required argument has a default value, and you provide an empty value to it, we won't know any better and that will be accepted (how do we know you didn't actually *mean* to do that?).

For every argument integer, boolean or string argument, a global associative array "cmdarg_cfg" is populated with the long version of the option. E.g., in the example above, '-c' would become ${cmdarg_cfg['groupmap']}, for friendlier access during scripting.

    cmdarg 'x:' 'some required thing'
    cmdarg_parse "$@"
    echo ${cmdarg_cfg['x']}

For array and hash arguments, you must declare the hash or array beforehand for population:

    declare -a myarray
    cmdarg 'a?[]' 'myarray' 'Some array of stuff'
    cmdarg_parse "$@"
    # Now you will be able to access ${myarray[0]}, ${myarray[1]}, etc. Similarly with hashes, just use declare -A and {}.

Automatic help messages
=======================

cmdarg takes the pain out of creating your --help messages. For example, consider you had this script:

    #!/bin/bash
    source /usr/lib/cmdarg.sh
    declare -a myarray

    cmdarg_info "header" "Some script that needed argument parsing"
    cmdarg_info "author" "Some Poor Bastard <somepoorbastard@hell.com>"
    cmdarg_info "copyright" "(C) 2013"
    cmdarg 'R:' 'required-thing' 'Some thing I REALLY require'
    cmdarg 'r:' 'required-thing-with-default' 'Some thing I require' 'Some default'
    cmdarg 'o?' 'optional-thing' 'Some optional thing'
    cmdarg 'b' 'boolean-thing' 'Some boolean thing'
    cmdarg 'a?[]' 'myarray' 'Some array of stuff'
    cmdarg_parse "$@"

... And you ran it with '--help', you would get a nice preformatted help message:

    test.sh (C) 2013 : Some Poor Bastard <somepoorbastard@hell.com>

    Some script that needed argument parsing

    Required Arguments:
        -R,--required-thing v : String. Some thing I REALLY require

    Optional Arguments:
        -r,--required-thing-with-default v : String. Some thing I require (Default "Some default")
        -o,--optional-thing v : String. Some optional thing
        -b,--boolean-thing : Boolean. Some boolean thing
        -a,--myarray v[, ...] : Array. Some array of stuff. Pass this argument multiple times for multiple values.

You can change the formatting of help messages with helper functions. (see Helpers, below).

Setting arrays and hashes
=========================

You can use the cmdarg function to accept arrays and hashes from the command line as well. Consider:

    declare -a array
    declare -A hash
    cmdarg 'a?[]' 'array' 'Some array you can set indexes in'
    cmdarg 'H?{}' 'hash' 'Some hash you can set keys in'


    your_script -a 32 --array something -H key=value --hash other_key=value


    echo ${array[0]}
    echo ${array[1]}
    echo ${hash['key']}
    echo ${hash['other_key']}

The long option names in this form must equal the name of a previously declared array or hash, appropriately. Cmdarg populates that variable directly with options for these arguments. Remember, arrays and hashes must be declared beforehand and must have the same name as the long argument given to their cmdarg option.

Positional arguments and --
===========================

Like any good option parsing framework, cmdarg understands '--' and positional arguments that are meant to be provided without any kind of option parsing applied to them. So if you have:

    myscript.sh -x 0 --longopt thingy file1 file2

... It would seem reasonable to assume that -x and --longopt would be parsed as expected; with arguments of 0 and thingy. But what to do with file1 and file2? cmdarg puts those into a bash indexed array called cmdarg_argv.

Similarly, cmdarg understands '--' which means "stop processing arguments, the rest of this stuff is just to be passed to the program directly". So in this case:

    myscript.sh -x 0 --longopt thingy -- --some-thing-with-dashes

... Cmdarg would parse -x and --longopt as expected, and then ${cmdarg_argv[0]} would hold "--some-thing-with-dashes", for your program to do with what it will.

Helpers
=======

cmdarg is meant to be extensible by default, so there are some places where you can hook into it to change cmdarg's behavior. By changing the members of the cmdarg_helpers hash, like this:

    # Change the way arguments are described in --help
    cmdarg_helpers['describe']=my_description_function
    # Completely replace cmdarg's builtin --help message generator with your own
    cmdarg_helpers['usage']=my_usage_function

## Description Helper

The description helper is used when you are happy with the overall structure of how cmdarg prints your usage message (header, required, optional, footer), but you want to change the way that individual arguments are described. You can do this by setting cmdarg_helpers['describe'] to the name of a bash function which accepts the following parameters (in order):

* $1 : long option to be described
* $2 : short option to be described
* $3 : argument type being described (will be one of ${CMDARG_TYPE_STRING}, ${CMDARG_TYPE_BOOLEAN}, ${CMDARG_TYPE_ARRAY} or ${CMDARG_TYPE_HASH})
* $4 : any default value that is set for the option being described
* $5 : The description for the option being described (as provided to 'cmdarg' previously)
* $6 : Flags for the option being described (a logically OR'ed bitmask of ${CMDARG_FLAG_NOARG}, ${CMDARG_FLAG_REQARG}, or ${CMDARG_FLAG_OPTARG} - although we specify this as a bitmask and advise you to treat it as such, in practice, this is usually an assignment of one of those 3 values)
* $7 : The name of any validator (if any) set for the option being described

This is every piece of information cmdarg keeps related to an argument (aside from its value). You can use these to describe the argument however you please. Your function must print the text description to stdout. The return value of your function is ignored.

For examples of this behavior, please see ./tests/test_helpers.sh

## Usage Helper

The usage helper is used when you want to completely override cmdarg's built in --help handler. Note that, when you override the usage helper, you will no longer benefit from the description helper, since that is called from inside of the default usage handler. If you override the usage helper, you will have to implement 100% of --help functionality on your own.

The short options for all specified arguments in cmdarg are kept in a hash ${CMDARG} which maps short arguments (-x) to long arguments (--long-version-of-x). However, it is not recommended that you iterate over this hash directly, as the order of hash key iteration is not guaranteed, so your --help message will change every time. To help with this, cmdarg populates two one-dimensional arrays, CMDARG_OPTIONAL and CMDARG_REQUIRED with the short options of all optional and require arguments, respectively. It is recommended that you iterate over these arrays instead of CMDARG to ensure an ordered output. It is further recommended that you still utilize cmdarg_describe to describe each individual argument, since this abstracts away the logic of how to get the flags, the type, etc of the argument, and lets you continue to provide a standard interface for your API developer(s).

For examples of this behavior, please see ./tests/test_helpers.sh, the "shunittest_test_describe_and_usage_helper" function.

getopt vs getopts
=================

cmdarg does not use getopt or getopts for option parsing. Its parser is written in 100% pure bash, and is self contained in cmdarg_parse. It will run the same way anywhere you have bash4.

Tests
=====

cmdarg is testable by the shunit bash unit testing tool (https://www.github.com/akesterson/shunit/). See the tests/ directory.

Commit message:

Close #17 and Close #16
Introduces CMDARG_ERROR_BEHAVIOR. Adds some more tests. Introduces new
behavior for hash validators (see README). Fixes a few odds and ends.

README.md, after:

cmdarg
======

[![Build Status](http://jenkins.aklabs.net/buildStatus/icon?job=cmdarg-test)](http://jenkins.aklabs.net/job/cmdarg-test/)

Requires bash >= 4.

    source cmdarg.sh

Enjoy

Installation
============

From source

    cd cmdarg
    make install

From RPM

    # add http://yum.aklabs.net/el/[5|6]/noarch as a yum repo for your system
    yum install cmdarg

Usage
=====

cmdarg is a helper library I wrote for bash scripts because, at current, option parsing in bash (-foo bar, etc) is really hard, lots harder than it should be, given bash's target audience. So here's my solution. There are 4 functions you will care about:

    cmdarg
    cmdarg_info
    cmdarg_parse
    cmdarg_usage

TL;DR
=====

Cmdarg lets you specify arguments (things you require), options (things you don't require), and lets you easily parse them. The arguments can be set on the command line either via '-X' or '--Y', where X is the short option and Y is the long option.

    cmdarg 'r:' 'required-thing' 'Some thing I require'
    cmdarg 'o?' 'optional-thing' 'Some optional thing'
    cmdarg 'b' 'boolean-thing' 'Some boolean thing'
    cmdarg_parse "$@"

    echo ${cmdarg_cfg['required-thing']}
    echo ${cmdarg_cfg['optional-thing']}
    echo ${cmdarg_cfg['boolean-thing']}

    # your_script.sh -r some_thingy -b -o optional_thing
    # your_script.sh --required-thing some_thingy --boolean-thing

Because cmdarg does key off of the short options, you are limited to as many options as you have unique single characters in your character set (likely 61 - 26 lower & upper alpha, +9 numerics).

cmdarg
======

This function is used to tell the library what command line arguments you accept.

    cmdarg FLAGS LONGOPT DESCRIPTION DEFAULT VALIDATOR

Examples:

    cmdarg 'f' 'boolean-flag' 'Some boolean flag'
    cmdarg 'a:' 'required-arg' 'Some required arg'
    cmdarg 'a?' 'optional-arg' 'Some optional arg with a default' 'default_value'
    cmdarg 'a:' 'required-validated-arg' 'Some required argument with a validator' '' validator_function

*FLAGS* : The first argument to cmdarg must be an argument specification. Argument specifications take the form 'NOT', where:

- N : The single letter Name of the argument
- O : Whether the option is optional or not. Use ':' here for a required argument, '?' for an optional argument. If you provide a default value for a required argument (:), then it becomes optional.
- T : The type. Leave empty for a string argument, use '[]' for an array argument, use '{}' for a hash argument.

If O and T are both unset, and only the single letter N is provided, then the argument is a boolean argument which will default to false.

*LONGOPT* is a long option name (such as long-option-name) that can be used to set your argument via --LONGOPT instead of via -N (from your FLAGS).

*DESCRIPTION* is a string that describes what this argument is for.

*DEFAULT* is any default value that you want to be set for this option if the user does not specify one

*VALIDATOR* The name of a bash function which will validate this argument (see VALIDATORS below).


Validators
==========

Validators must be bash function names - not bash statements - and they must accept one argument, being the value to validate. Validators are not told the name of the option, only the value. Validator functions must return 0 if they value they are given is valid, and 1 if it is invalid. Validators should refrain from producing output on stdout or stderr.

For example, this is a valid validator:

    function validate_int
    {
        echo "$1" | grep -E '^[0-9]+$'
    }

    cmdarg 'x' 'x-option' 'some opt' '' validate_int

... While this is not:

    cmdarg 'x' 'x-option' 'some opt' '' "grep -E '^[0-9]+$'"

There is an exception to this form, and that is for hash arguments (e.g. 'x:{}'). In this instance, the key for the argument (e.g. -x key=value) is to be considered a part of the value, and the user may want to validate this as well as the value. In this instance, when calling a validator against a hash argument, the validator will receive a second argument, which is the key of the hash being validated. For example:

    # When we receive
    cmdarg 'x:{}' 'something' 'something' my_validator
    cmdarg_parse -x hashkey=hashvalue
    # ... we will call
    my_validator hashvalue hashkey

cmdarg_info
===========

This function sets up information about your program for use when printing the help/usage message. Again, see cmdarg.sh for the latest syntax.

    cmdarg_info "header" "Some script that needed argument parsing"
    cmdarg_info "author" "Some Poor Bastard <somepoorbastard@hell.com>"
    cmdarg_info "copyright" "(C) 2013"

cmdarg_parse
============

This command does what you expect, parsing your command line arguments. However you must pass your command line arguments to it. Generally this means:

    cmdarg_parse "$@"

... Beware that "$@" will change depending on your context. So if you have a main() function called in your script, you need to make sure that you pass "$@" from the toplevel script in to it, otherwise the options will be blank when you pass them to cmdarg_parse.

Any argument parsed that has a validator assigned, and whose validator returns nonzero, is considered a failure. Any REQUIRED argument that is not specified is considered a failure. However, it is worth noting that if a required argument has a default value, and you provide an empty value to it, we won't know any better and that will be accepted (how do we know you didn't actually *mean* to do that?).

For every argument integer, boolean or string argument, a global associative array "cmdarg_cfg" is populated with the long version of the option. E.g., in the example above, '-c' would become ${cmdarg_cfg['groupmap']}, for friendlier access during scripting.

    cmdarg 'x:' 'some required thing'
    cmdarg_parse "$@"
    echo ${cmdarg_cfg['x']}

For array and hash arguments, you must declare the hash or array beforehand for population:

    declare -a myarray
    cmdarg 'a?[]' 'myarray' 'Some array of stuff'
    cmdarg_parse "$@"
    # Now you will be able to access ${myarray[0]}, ${myarray[1]}, etc. Similarly with hashes, just use declare -A and {}.

Automatic help messages
=======================

cmdarg takes the pain out of creating your --help messages. For example, consider you had this script:

    #!/bin/bash
    source /usr/lib/cmdarg.sh
    declare -a myarray

    cmdarg_info "header" "Some script that needed argument parsing"
    cmdarg_info "author" "Some Poor Bastard <somepoorbastard@hell.com>"
    cmdarg_info "copyright" "(C) 2013"
    cmdarg 'R:' 'required-thing' 'Some thing I REALLY require'
    cmdarg 'r:' 'required-thing-with-default' 'Some thing I require' 'Some default'
    cmdarg 'o?' 'optional-thing' 'Some optional thing'
    cmdarg 'b' 'boolean-thing' 'Some boolean thing'
    cmdarg 'a?[]' 'myarray' 'Some array of stuff'
    cmdarg_parse "$@"

... And you ran it with '--help', you would get a nice preformatted help message:

    test.sh (C) 2013 : Some Poor Bastard <somepoorbastard@hell.com>

    Some script that needed argument parsing

    Required Arguments:
        -R,--required-thing v : String. Some thing I REALLY require

    Optional Arguments:
        -r,--required-thing-with-default v : String. Some thing I require (Default "Some default")
        -o,--optional-thing v : String. Some optional thing
        -b,--boolean-thing : Boolean. Some boolean thing
        -a,--myarray v[, ...] : Array. Some array of stuff. Pass this argument multiple times for multiple values.

You can change the formatting of help messages with helper functions. (see Helpers, below).

Setting arrays and hashes
=========================

You can use the cmdarg function to accept arrays and hashes from the command line as well. Consider:

    declare -a array
    declare -A hash
    cmdarg 'a?[]' 'array' 'Some array you can set indexes in'
    cmdarg 'H?{}' 'hash' 'Some hash you can set keys in'


    your_script -a 32 --array something -H key=value --hash other_key=value


    echo ${array[0]}
    echo ${array[1]}
    echo ${hash['key']}
    echo ${hash['other_key']}

The long option names in this form must equal the name of a previously declared array or hash, appropriately. Cmdarg populates that variable directly with options for these arguments. Remember, arrays and hashes must be declared beforehand and must have the same name as the long argument given to their cmdarg option.

Positional arguments and --
===========================

Like any good option parsing framework, cmdarg understands '--' and positional arguments that are meant to be provided without any kind of option parsing applied to them. So if you have:

    myscript.sh -x 0 --longopt thingy file1 file2

... It would seem reasonable to assume that -x and --longopt would be parsed as expected; with arguments of 0 and thingy. But what to do with file1 and file2? cmdarg puts those into a bash indexed array called cmdarg_argv.

Similarly, cmdarg understands '--' which means "stop processing arguments, the rest of this stuff is just to be passed to the program directly". So in this case:

    myscript.sh -x 0 --longopt thingy -- --some-thing-with-dashes

... Cmdarg would parse -x and --longopt as expected, and then ${cmdarg_argv[0]} would hold "--some-thing-with-dashes", for your program to do with what it will.

Helpers
=======

cmdarg is meant to be extensible by default, so there are some places where you can hook into it to change cmdarg's behavior. By changing the members of the cmdarg_helpers hash, like this:

    # Change the way arguments are described in --help
    cmdarg_helpers['describe']=my_description_function
    # Completely replace cmdarg's builtin --help message generator with your own
    cmdarg_helpers['usage']=my_usage_function

## Description Helper

The description helper is used when you are happy with the overall structure of how cmdarg prints your usage message (header, required, optional, footer), but you want to change the way that individual arguments are described. You can do this by setting cmdarg_helpers['describe'] to the name of a bash function which accepts the following parameters (in order):

* $1 : long option to be described
* $2 : short option to be described
* $3 : argument type being described (will be one of ${CMDARG_TYPE_STRING}, ${CMDARG_TYPE_BOOLEAN}, ${CMDARG_TYPE_ARRAY} or ${CMDARG_TYPE_HASH})
* $4 : any default value that is set for the option being described
* $5 : The description for the option being described (as provided to 'cmdarg' previously)
* $6 : Flags for the option being described (a logically OR'ed bitmask of ${CMDARG_FLAG_NOARG}, ${CMDARG_FLAG_REQARG}, or ${CMDARG_FLAG_OPTARG} - although we specify this as a bitmask and advise you to treat it as such, in practice, this is usually an assignment of one of those 3 values)
* $7 : The name of any validator (if any) set for the option being described

This is every piece of information cmdarg keeps related to an argument (aside from its value). You can use these to describe the argument however you please. Your function must print the text description to stdout. The return value of your function is ignored.

For examples of this behavior, please see ./tests/test_helpers.sh

## Usage Helper

The usage helper is used when you want to completely override cmdarg's built in --help handler. Note that, when you override the usage helper, you will no longer benefit from the description helper, since that is called from inside of the default usage handler. If you override the usage helper, you will have to implement 100% of --help functionality on your own.

The short options for all specified arguments in cmdarg are kept in a hash ${CMDARG} which maps short arguments (-x) to long arguments (--long-version-of-x). However, it is not recommended that you iterate over this hash directly, as the order of hash key iteration is not guaranteed, so your --help message will change every time. To help with this, cmdarg populates two one-dimensional arrays, CMDARG_OPTIONAL and CMDARG_REQUIRED with the short options of all optional and require arguments, respectively. It is recommended that you iterate over these arrays instead of CMDARG to ensure an ordered output. It is further recommended that you still utilize cmdarg_describe to describe each individual argument, since this abstracts away the logic of how to get the flags, the type, etc of the argument, and lets you continue to provide a standard interface for your API developer(s).

For examples of this behavior, please see ./tests/test_helpers.sh, the "shunittest_test_describe_and_usage_helper" function.

Controlling cmdarg's behavior on error
======================================

By default, whenever something happens that cmdarg doesn't like, it will 'return 1' up the stack to the caller. This is different from the old behavior in v1.0, which would 'exit 1'. You can control cmdarg's error behavior by setting the CMDARG_ERROR_BEHAVIOR variable to the function/builtin you want called whenever an error is encountered.

To get the old v1.0 behavior back, you can, before calling any cmdarg functions:

    CMDARG_ERROR_BEHAVIOR=exit

If you want cmdarg to call some function of your own when it encounters an error, you could:

    CMDARG_ERROR_BEHAVIOR=my_error_function

CMDARG_ERROR_BEHAVIOR is treated as a function call (e.g. return or exit) with one argument, the value to return. You will be given no more context regarding the error (and, in fact, you should not expect this to be called unless a fatal error has been encountered, whether during setup or parsing).

getopt vs getopts
=================

cmdarg does not use getopt or getopts for option parsing. Its parser is written in 100% pure bash, and is self contained in cmdarg_parse. It will run the same way anywhere you have bash4.

Tests
=====

cmdarg is testable by the shunit bash unit testing tool (https://www.github.com/akesterson/shunit/). See the tests/ directory.
